README.md, before:

# pophelper 1.2.0

`pophelper` is an R package and web app to analyse and visualise population structure. `pophelper` curently supports output files generated from population analysis programs such as ADMIXTURE, fastSTRUCTURE, STRUCTURE and TESS. The `pophelper` package can be used to tabulate runs, summarise runs, estimate *K* using the Evanno method, export files for CLUMPP, export files for DISTRUCT and generate barplot figures. Additionally, there are functions to create spatial plots and interpolation using geographical coordinates. 

For a detailed demonstration and walkthrough, refer the online [vignette](http://royfrancis.github.io/pophelper/). Click [here](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLcQHvdPK8df1p_ZtpHOs9hUj6aNR670j_) to watch video tutorials based on version 1.1.5. New versions and updates are shown only on this GitHub page.

## Installation  
You need to have R (> 3.1.2) statistical package installed on your system. [R](https://www.r-project.org/) is open-source and freely available to download for Windows, Mac and other OS. Then, install the 'devtools' package. Then, you can install `pophelper` from `github` using the `devtools` package.

```coffee
#install devtools package from CRAN
install.packages('devtools',dependencies=T)
library(devtools)

#install pophelper package from GitHub
install_github('royfrancis/pophelper')

#load library for use
library(pophelper)
```

`pophelper 1.2.0` has been tested using R version 3.3.1 on Windows 7 64bit, Mac OS X 10.10.1 (Yosemite) 64bit, Linux Ubuntu 16.04.1 and Scientific Linux 6.7 (R 3.3.0). Note that `pophelper 1.2.0` includes binary executables for CLUMPP and DISTRUCT.

## Web App   
An online interactive version of pophelper is now available at [pophelper.com](http://www.pophelper.com).

## List of Functions  
  
For help on any function, use  
`?tabulateRunsStructure`  
`?evannoMethodStructure`  

For functions where one or more files need to be selected, the selection can be performed interactively. Windows users can use `choose.files(multi=T)`. Mac users can use `file.choose()` for single selection and `tk_choose.files()` from `tcltk` package for multiple selection.  


```coffee
tabulateRunsStructure()   # Get a tabulation of several STRUCTURE files
summariseRunsStructure()  # Summarise runs by repeats for each K
evannoMethodStructure()   # Perform the Evanno method on summarised data
runsToDfStructure()       # Convert STRUCTURE run files to R dataframe
clumppExportStructure()   # Export files for use with CLUMPP

collectRunsTess()         # Collect TESS output from multiple directories into one
tabulateRunsTess()        # Get a tabulation of several TESS files
summariseRunsTess()       # Summarise runs by repeats for each K
runsToDfTess()            # Convert TESS run files to R dataframe
clumppExportTess()        # Export files for use with CLUMPP

tabulateRunsMatrix()      # Get a tabulation of several MATRIX files
summariseRunsMatrix()     # Summarise runs by repeats for each K
runsToDfMatrix()          # Convert MATRIX run files to R dataframe
clumppExportMatrix()      # Export files for use with CLUMPP

collectClumppOutput()     # Collect CLUMPP output into a common directory
plotRuns()                # Plot a barplot from STRUCTURE/TESS/Matrix/table files
PlotMultiline()           # Plot a multi-line barplot from STRUCTURE/TESS/Matrix/table file
distructExport()          # Export files for DISTRUCT from STRUCTURE/TESS/Matrix/table file

plotRunsInterpolate()     # Spatially interpolate clusters from a STRUCTURE/TESS run file
plotRunsSpatial()         # Cluster by max assignment and plot points spatially

analyseRuns()             # A wrapper function to quickly tabulate, summarise, perform evanno method, 
                          # clumpp output and generate barplots from STRUCTURE or TESS run files.
```  

## Functions and workflow 

![workflow-structure](vignettes/workflow-structure.png)  
__Fig 1.__ *Workflow for STRUCTURE files. Files/objects are indicated in black text and functions are indicated in blue. The `analyseRuns()` function is a wrapper function which can be used to run several functions together. This is indicated by the asterisk and the orange path.*

![workflow-tess](vignettes/workflow-tess.png)  
__Fig 2.__ *Workflow for TESS files. Files/objects are indicated in black text and functions are indicated in blue. The `analyseRuns()` function is a wrapper function which can be used to run several functions together. This is indicated by the asterisk and the orange path.*

![workflow-matrix](vignettes/workflow-matrix.png)  
__Fig 3.__ *Workflow for MATRIX files. Files/objects are indicated in black text and functions are indicated in blue. The `analyseRuns()` function is a wrapper function which can be used to run several functions together. This is indicated by the asterisk and the orange path.*

![evanno-method](vignettes/evanno-plot.png)  
__Fig 4.__ *Plots from Evanno Method.*

![plotruns-sep-join-nolab-lab](vignettes/structure-sep-join-nolab-lab.png)  
__Fig 5.__ *Left: Single run plotted separately without pop labels (top) and with pop labels (bottom). Right: Two runs joined together in one image without pop labels (top) and with pop labels (bottom).*  

![plotruns-lab-sort-reorder](vignettes/structure-lab-sort-reorder.png)  
__Fig 6.__ *Left: Single run plotted separately with pop labels sorted by one cluster (top) and sorted by all clusters (bottom). Right Top: Single run with pop labels reordered. Pop B before Pop A. Right Bottom: Two runs joined together in one image with pop labels reordered and individuals sorted by all clusters.*  

![plotruns-tab-nolab](vignettes/structure-tab-nolab.png)  
__Fig 7.__ *Left: Combined files (Three STRUCTURE runs for K=4). Middle: Aligned files (Three STRUCTURE runs for K=4 aligned using CLUMPP). Right: Merged file (Three runs for K=4 merged into one table/figure using CLUMPP).*  

![plotmultiline](vignettes/plotmultiline.png)  
__Fig 8.__ *Left: `plotMultiline` default output. Middle Left: Modified output where samples per line and lines per page were defined manually. Middle Right: Individuals sorted by cluster 1. Right: Individuals sorted by all clusters.*  

![plotmultiline-colours](vignettes/plotmultiline-colours.png)  

__Fig 9.__ *Multiline plots with (left) standard colours, (middle) `rich.colors()` from `gplots` package and (right) `brewer.pal(8,"Spectral")` from `RColorBrewer` package.*  

![plotruns-interpolate](vignettes/plotruns-interpolate-join.png)  

__Fig 10.__ *Interpolated plot of one TESS run file containing 6 clusters (K=6). The default interpolation algorithm (method) used was kriging. In this particular case, it is known that K=2, therefore only cluster 2 has useful information.*  

![plotruns-interpolate-methods](vignettes/plotruns-interpolate-methods.png)  

__Fig 11.__ *Interpolated plot of one cluster (Cluster 2) of one TESS run file containing 6 clusters (K=6) showing different interpolation methods. Row 1 from left: bilinear, bicubic and Inverse distance weighting. Row 2 from left: Nearest neighbour and Kriging.*  

![plotruns-interpolate-colours](vignettes/plotruns-interpolate-customcolours.png)  

__Fig 12.__ *Interpolation plots showing some of the available colour palettes.*  

![plotruns-spatial](vignettes/plotruns-spatial.png)  

__Fig 13.__ *Some of the plots created using the function `plotRunsSpatial()`.*  

For detailed demonstration and description, refer the [vignette](http://royfrancis.github.io/pophelper/).

### Disclaimer

The `pophelper` R package is offered free and without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. I will not be held liable to you for any damage arising out of the use, modification or inability to use this program. `pophelper` R package can be used, redistributed and/or modified freely for non-commercial purposes subject to the original source being properly cited. Licensed under GPL-3. Please make sure you verify all your results by eye.  

### Contact

If you have an comments, suggestions, corrections or ideas on ways to improve or extend this package, feel free to contact me. In case of issues, you can also add a comment to the issues section here on Github. Preferred contact email is roy[dot]m[dot]francis[at]outlook[dot]com. If you don't receive a reply from me in 48 hours, consider sending an email to roy[dot]francis[at]ebc[dot]uu[dot]se as well.  

2016 Roy M Francis

Commit message:

v121 fixed parse error with structure files when k=1

README.md, after:

# pophelper 1.2.1

`pophelper` is an R package and web app to analyse and visualise population structure. `pophelper` curently supports output files generated from population analysis programs such as ADMIXTURE, fastSTRUCTURE, STRUCTURE and TESS. The `pophelper` package can be used to tabulate runs, summarise runs, estimate *K* using the Evanno method, export files for CLUMPP, export files for DISTRUCT and generate barplot figures. Additionally, there are functions to create spatial plots and interpolation using geographical coordinates. 

For a detailed demonstration and walkthrough, refer the online [vignette](http://royfrancis.github.io/pophelper/). Click [here](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLcQHvdPK8df1p_ZtpHOs9hUj6aNR670j_) to watch video tutorials based on version 1.1.5. New versions and updates are shown only on this GitHub page.

## Installation  
You need to have R (> 3.1.2) statistical package installed on your system. [R](https://www.r-project.org/) is open-source and freely available to download for Windows, Mac and other OS. Then, install the 'devtools' package. Then, you can install `pophelper` from `github` using the `devtools` package.

```coffee
#install devtools package from CRAN
install.packages('devtools',dependencies=T)
library(devtools)

#install pophelper package from GitHub
install_github('royfrancis/pophelper')

#load library for use
library(pophelper)
```

`pophelper 1.2.0` has been tested using R version 3.3.1 on Windows 7 64bit, Mac OS X 10.10.1 (Yosemite) 64bit, Linux Ubuntu 16.04.1 and Scientific Linux 6.7 (R 3.3.0). Note that `pophelper 1.2.0` and later includes binary executables for CLUMPP and DISTRUCT.

## Web App   
An online interactive version of pophelper is now available at [pophelper.com](http://www.pophelper.com).

## List of Functions  
  
For help on any function, use  
`?tabulateRunsStructure`  
`?evannoMethodStructure`  

For functions where one or more files need to be selected, the selection can be performed interactively. Windows users can use `choose.files(multi=T)`. Mac users can use `file.choose()` for single selection and `tk_choose.files()` from `tcltk` package for multiple selection.  


```coffee
tabulateRunsStructure()   # Get a tabulation of several STRUCTURE files
summariseRunsStructure()  # Summarise runs by repeats for each K
evannoMethodStructure()   # Perform the Evanno method on summarised data
runsToDfStructure()       # Convert STRUCTURE run files to R dataframe
clumppExportStructure()   # Export files for use with CLUMPP

collectRunsTess()         # Collect TESS output from multiple directories into one
tabulateRunsTess()        # Get a tabulation of several TESS files
summariseRunsTess()       # Summarise runs by repeats for each K
runsToDfTess()            # Convert TESS run files to R dataframe
clumppExportTess()        # Export files for use with CLUMPP

tabulateRunsMatrix()      # Get a tabulation of several MATRIX files
summariseRunsMatrix()     # Summarise runs by repeats for each K
runsToDfMatrix()          # Convert MATRIX run files to R dataframe
clumppExportMatrix()      # Export files for use with CLUMPP

collectClumppOutput()     # Collect CLUMPP output into a common directory
plotRuns()                # Plot a barplot from STRUCTURE/TESS/Matrix/table files
PlotMultiline()           # Plot a multi-line barplot from STRUCTURE/TESS/Matrix/table file
distructExport()          # Export files for DISTRUCT from STRUCTURE/TESS/Matrix/table file

plotRunsInterpolate()     # Spatially interpolate clusters from a STRUCTURE/TESS run file
plotRunsSpatial()         # Cluster by max assignment and plot points spatially

analyseRuns()             # A wrapper function to quickly tabulate, summarise, perform evanno method, 
                          # clumpp output and generate barplots from STRUCTURE or TESS run files.
```  

## Functions and workflow 

![workflow-structure](vignettes/workflow-structure.png)  
__Fig 1.__ *Workflow for STRUCTURE files. Files/objects are indicated in black text and functions are indicated in blue. The `analyseRuns()` function is a wrapper function which can be used to run several functions together. This is indicated by the asterisk and the orange path. For clumpp results, the clumpp executable must be run to continue with the workflow.*

![workflow-tess](vignettes/workflow-tess.png)  
__Fig 2.__ *Workflow for TESS files. Files/objects are indicated in black text and functions are indicated in blue. The `analyseRuns()` function is a wrapper function which can be used to run several functions together. This is indicated by the asterisk and the orange path. For clumpp results, the clumpp executable must be run to continue with the workflow.*

![workflow-matrix](vignettes/workflow-matrix.png)  
__Fig 3.__ *Workflow for MATRIX files. Files/objects are indicated in black text and functions are indicated in blue. The `analyseRuns()` function is a wrapper function which can be used to run several functions together. This is indicated by the asterisk and the orange path. For clumpp results, the clumpp executable must be run to continue with the workflow.*

![evanno-method](vignettes/evanno-plot.png)  
__Fig 4.__ *Plots from Evanno Method.*

![plotruns-sep-join-nolab-lab](vignettes/structure-sep-join-nolab-lab.png)  
__Fig 5.__ *Left: Single run plotted separately without pop labels (top) and with pop labels (bottom). Right: Two runs joined together in one image without pop labels (top) and with pop labels (bottom).*  

![plotruns-lab-sort-reorder](vignettes/structure-lab-sort-reorder.png)  
__Fig 6.__ *Left: Single run plotted separately with pop labels sorted by one cluster (top) and sorted by all clusters (bottom). Right Top: Single run with pop labels reordered. Pop B before Pop A. Right Bottom: Two runs joined together in one image with pop labels reordered and individuals sorted by all clusters.*  

![plotruns-tab-nolab](vignettes/structure-tab-nolab.png)  
__Fig 7.__ *Left: Combined files (Three STRUCTURE runs for K=4). Middle: Aligned files (Three STRUCTURE runs for K=4 aligned using CLUMPP). Right: Merged file (Three runs for K=4 merged into one table/figure using CLUMPP).*  

![plotmultiline](vignettes/plotmultiline.png)  
__Fig 8.__ *Left: `plotMultiline` default output. Middle Left: Modified output where samples per line and lines per page were defined manually. Middle Right: Individuals sorted by cluster 1. Right: Individuals sorted by all clusters.*  

![plotmultiline-colours](vignettes/plotmultiline-colours.png)  

__Fig 9.__ *Multiline plots with (left) standard colours, (middle) `rich.colors()` from `gplots` package and (right) `brewer.pal(8,"Spectral")` from `RColorBrewer` package.*  

![plotruns-interpolate](vignettes/plotruns-interpolate-join.png)  

__Fig 10.__ *Interpolated plot of one TESS run file containing 6 clusters (K=6). The default interpolation algorithm (method) used was kriging. In this particular case, it is known that K=2, therefore only cluster 2 has useful information.*  

![plotruns-interpolate-methods](vignettes/plotruns-interpolate-methods.png)  

__Fig 11.__ *Interpolated plot of one cluster (Cluster 2) of one TESS run file containing 6 clusters (K=6) showing different interpolation methods. Row 1 from left: bilinear, bicubic and Inverse distance weighting. Row 2 from left: Nearest neighbour and Kriging.*  

![plotruns-interpolate-colours](vignettes/plotruns-interpolate-customcolours.png)  

__Fig 12.__ *Interpolation plots showing some of the available colour palettes.*  

![plotruns-spatial](vignettes/plotruns-spatial.png)  

__Fig 13.__ *Some of the plots created using the function `plotRunsSpatial()`.*  

For detailed demonstration and description, refer the [vignette](http://royfrancis.github.io/pophelper/).

### Disclaimer

The `pophelper` R package is offered free and without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. I will not be held liable to you for any damage arising out of the use, modification or inability to use this program. `pophelper` R package can be used, redistributed and/or modified freely for non-commercial purposes subject to the original source being properly cited. Licensed under GPL-3. Please make sure you verify all your results by eye.  

### Contact

If you have an comments, suggestions, corrections or ideas on ways to improve or extend this package, feel free to contact me. In case of issues, you can also add a comment to the issues section here on Github. Preferred contact email is roy[dot]m[dot]francis[at]outlook[dot]com. If you don't receive a reply from me in 48 hours, consider sending an email to roy[dot]francis[at]ebc[dot]uu[dot]se as well.  

2016 Roy M Francis
